# Exercise 1.1:

Below is a sequence of expressions. What is the result printed by the
interpreter in response to each expression? Assume that the sequence
is to be evaluated in the order in which it is presented.

```
10
(+ 5 3 4)
(- 9 1)
(/ 6 2)
(+ (* 2 4) (- 4 6))
(def a 3)
(def b (+ a 1))
(+ a b (* a b))
(= a b)
(if (and (> b a) (< b (* a b)))
  b
  a)
(cond (= a 4) 6
      (= b 4) (+ 6 7 a)
      :else 25)
(+ 2 (if (> b a) b a))
(* (cond (> a b) a
         (< a b) b
         :else -1)
   (+ a 1))
```

# Exercise 1.2
Translate the following expression into
prefix form:

$$ \frac{5+4+(2-(3-(6+\frac{4}{5})))}{3(6-2)(2-7)} $$


# Exercise 1.3:
Define a function that takes three
numbers as arguments and returns the sum of the
squares of the two larger numbers.

# Exercise 1.4:

Observe that our model of evaluation
allows for combinations whose operators are com-
pound expressions. Use this observation to describe
the behavior of the following function:

```
(defn a-plus-abs-b [a b]
  ((if (> b 0) + -)
   a
   b))
```

# Exercise 1.5:

Ben Bitdiddle has invented a test to determine whether the interpreter he is
faced with is using applicative-order evaluation or normal-order
evaluation.

He defines the following two functions:

```
(defn p []
  (p))
```

```
(defn test [x y]
  (if (= x 0)
      0
      y))
```
Then he evaluates the expression

```
(test 0 (p))
```

What behavior will Ben observe with an interpreter
that uses applicative-order evaluation?

What behavior will he observe with an interpreter that uses normal-order
evaluation?

(Assume that the evaluation rule for the special form if is the same whether the
interpreter is using normal or applicative order: The predicate expression is
evaluated first, and the result determines whether to evaluate the consequent or
the alternative expression.)
