# Predicates
```clojure
(= x y)
```

Returns true if:

* numbers in the same 'category', and numerically the same, where category is one of (integer or ratio), floating point, or BigDecimal.
* sequences, lists, vectors, or queues, with equal elements in the same order.
* sets, with equal elements, ignoring order.
* maps, with equal key/value pairs, ignoring order.
* symbols, or both keywords, with equal namespaces and names.
* refs, vars, or atoms, and they are the same object, i.e. (identical? x y) is true.
* the same type defined with deftype. The type's equiv method is called and its return value becomes the value of (= x y).
* other types, and Java's x.equals(y) is true. The result should be unsurprising for nil, booleans, characters, and strings.

## Numbers with coercion
```clojure
(== x y)
```
    > (= 2 2.0)
    false ; has different categories integer and floating point

    > (== 2 2.0)
    true

    > (== 5 5N (float 5.0) (double 5.0) (biginteger 5))
    true

    > (== Double/NaN Double/NaN)
    false ; Floating point spec says this

    > (== :foo)
    true

    > (== :foo :foo)
    ClassCastException clojure.lang.Keyword cannot be cast to java.lang.Number
    clojure.lang.Numbers.equiv (Numbers.java:206)

    > (== 2 "a")
    ClassCastException java.lang.String cannot be cast to java.lang.Number
    clojure.lang.Numbers.equiv (Numbers.java:206)

## and
    (and <e1> ... <en>)

    > (and (= 1 2) (/ 1 0))
    false

    > (and (= 1 1) (/ 1 0))
    ArithmeticException Divide by zero  clojure.lang.Numbers.divide (Numbers.java:156)

## or

    (or <e1> ... <en>)

    > (or (= 1 1) (/ 1 0))
    true

    > (or (= 0 1) :truthy)
    :truthy

## Not

    (not <e>)

False if <e> truthy, true if <e> false
