# Tree Recursion

Another common pattern of computation is called tree recursion . As an
example, consider computing the sequence of Fibonacci numbers, in
which each number is the sum of the preceding two:

$$
0, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21 \dots
$$

In general, the Fibonacci numbers can be defined by the rule

TODO

We can immediately translate this definition into a recursive procedure
for computing Fibonacci numbers:

```clojure
(defn fib [n]
  (cond (= n 0) 0
        (= n 1) 1
        :else (+ (fib (- n 1))
                 (fib (- n 2))))
```

Consider the paern of this computation. To compute `(fib 5)` , we com-
pute `(fib 4)` and `(fib 3)` . To compute `(fib 4)` , we compute `(fib 3)`
and `(fib 2)` . In general, the evolved process looks like a tree, as shown
in Figure 1.5. Notice that the branches split into two at each level (ex-
cept at the boom); this reflects the fact that the `fib` procedure calls
itself twice each time it is invoked.

is procedure is instructive as a prototypical tree recursion, but it
is a terrible way to compute Fibonacci numbers because it does so much
redundant computation. Notice in Figure 1.5 that the entire computation
of (fib 3) —almost half the work—is duplicated. In fact, it is not hard to
show that the number of times the procedure will compute (fib 1) or
(fib 0) (the number of leaves in the above tree, in general) is precisely
Fib(n + 1). To get an idea of how bad this is, one can show that the value
of Fib(n) grows exponentially with `n`

TODO: fig1.5

us, the process uses a number of steps that grows exponentially with
the input. On the other hand, the space required grows only linearly
with the input, because we need keep track only of which nodes are
above us in the tree at any point in the computation. In general, the
number of steps required by a tree-recursive process will be propor-
tional to the number of nodes in the tree, while the space required will
be proportional to the maximum depth of the tree.
We can also formulate an iterative process for computing the Fi-
bonacci numbers. e idea is to use a pair of integers a and b, initialized
to Fib(1) = 1 and Fib(0) = 0, and to repeatedly apply the simultaneous transformations

$$ a \leftarrow a+b $$
$$ b \leftarrow a $$

It is not hard to show that, aer applying this transformation n times, a
and b will be equal, respectively, to Fib(n + 1) and Fib(n). us, we can
compute Fibonacci numbers iteratively using the procedure

```clojure
(defn fib [n]
  (fib-iter 1 0 n))

(defn- fib-iter [a b count]
  (if (= count 0)
      b
      (fib-iter (+ a b) a (- count 1))))
```

This is a direct translation from SICP's Scheme code, Clojure allows us to express the idea of getting all the Fibonacci numbers from the transformation above as follows

```clojure
> (def fibs (map first (iterate (fn [[a b]]
                                  [(+ a b) a])
                                [1 1])))

> (take 10 fibs)
(1 2 3 5 8 13 21 34 55 89)
```

TODO: Explain example


is second method for computing Fib(n) is a linear iteration. e differ-
ence in number of steps required by the two methods—one linear in n,
one growing as fast as Fib(n) itself—is enormous, even for small inputs.

One should not conclude from this that tree-recursive processes
are useless. When we consider processes that operate on hierarchically
structured data rather than numbers, we will find that tree recursion is
a natural and powerful tool (the interpretation process itself is recursive int heis way). But even in numerical operations, tree-
recursive processes can be useful in helping us to understand and de-
sign programs. For instance, although the first fib procedure is much
less efficient than the second one, it is more straightforward, being lile
more than a translation into Lisp of the definition of the Fibonacci se-
quence. To formulate the iterative algorithm required noticing that the
computation could be recast as an iteration with three state variables.

One approach to coping with redundant computations is to arrange maers so
that we automatically construct a table of values as they are computed.
Each time we are asked to apply the procedure to some argument, we first look
to see if the value is already stored in the table, in which case we avoid
performing the redundant computation. is strategy, known as tabulation or
memoization ,
can be implemented in a straightforward way. Tabulation can sometimes be used
to transform processes that require an exponential number of steps (such as
count-change ) into processes whose space and time requirements grow linearly
with the input.

# Ex 1.11
A function f is defined by the rule that

TO: MAFF

Write a procedure that computes f by means of a recursive
process. Write a procedure that computes f by means of an
iterative process.

# Ex 1.12


TODO Pascal

e numbers at the edge of the triangle are all 1, and each
number inside the triangle is the sum of the two numbers
above it. 35 Write a procedure that computes elements of
Pascal’s triangle by means of a recursive proce
